According to the standard theory, our universe emerged as a "singularity" around 13.7 billion years ago. What is a "singularity" and where it comes from? Well, to be honest, we do not know for sure. Singularities are zones which defy our current understanding of physics. One thinks that they exist at the core of "black holes". Black holes are areas of intense gravitational pressure. It is believed that the pressure is so intense that finite matter ends up in the simplified truth to an infinite density (a mathematical concept which truly boggles the mind). These infinite density zones are called "singularities". It is believed that our universe began as something infinitely small, infinitely hot, infinitely dense - a singularity. Where it came from? We do not know. Why it appeared? We do not know. <BR>
<BR>
After his initial appearance, this uniqueness apparently inflated (the "Big Bang"), expanded and cooled-, from very, very small and very, very hot, to the size and temperature of our current universe. Continues to expand and cool to this day and we are inside of it: incredible creatures living in a special planet, turning around a beautiful grouped star with several hundred billion other stars in a galaxy flying through the cosmos, and all this happens within an expanding universe that began as an infinitesimal singularity which appeared out of nowhere for reasons unknown. This is the theory of the Big Bang.
<BR> <HR>
<BR> <H3> The Big Bang Theory - Common Misconceptions </h3> <BR>
There are many misconceptions about the Big Bang theory. For example, we tend to imagine a giant explosion. Experts, however, said that there has been an explosion; It was (and continues to be) an expansion. Instead of imagining a balloon popping and releasing its contents, imagine a balloon expanding: an infinitesimally small balloon expanding to the size of our current universe.
<BR>
Another misconception is that we tend to imagine this singularity as a little fireball appearing somewhere in space. According to many experts, however, the space did not exist before the Big Bang. In the late 60s and early 70s, when man walked on the moon for the first time, "three British astrophysicists, Steven Hawking, George Ellis, and Roger Penrose turned their attention to the Theory of Relativity and its implications on the notion of time. In 1968 and 1970 they published articles that extended the theory of general relativity to include measurements of time and space. According to their calculations, time and space had a finite beginning that corresponded to the origin of matter and energy the singularity did not appear in space; instead, the space began inside of the singularity before the singularity, nothing existed - neither space nor time, nor matter or energy - nothing. We do not know where it came from, why we're here, or even where we are. All we really know is that we are in it and that at some point it did not exist and neither we .
<BR> <HR>
<H3> The Big Bang Theory - Evidence in Favor Theory </h3>
What are the key evidence supporting the Big Bang theory?
 First of all, we are reasonably certain that the universe had a beginning.
    Second, the galaxies appear to be moving away from us at speeds proportional to their distances. This is called "Hubble's Law", so named because of Edwin Hubble (1889-1953), the discoverer of this phenomenon in 1929. This observation supports the expansion of the universe and suggests that the universe was compressed at some point. <BR > <BR>
    Third, if the universe was initially very, very hot as the Big Bang suggests, we should be able to find some trace of that heat. In 1965, radio astronomers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson discovered a Fund Cosmic Microwave (CMB) of 2,725 degrees Kelvin (-454.765 degrees Fahrenheit, -270.425 degree Celsius) that pervades the observable universe. It is believed that this is the rest by which scientists were looking for. In 1978, Penzias and Wilson received the Nobel Prize in Physics for their discoveries.
    Finally, it is believed that the abundance of "light elements" Hydrogen and Helium found in the observable universe support the model origins of the Big Bang.
<BR> <HR> <h3> The Big Bang Theory - The only plausible theory </h3> <BR>?
It is the standard Big Bang theory the only model consistent with these evidences? No, it's just the most popular model. The internationally known astrophysicist George FR Ellis explains: "People need to be aware that there is a range of models that can explain the observations ... For example, I can build you a spherically symmetrical universe with Earth at its center, and you can not disprove it based on observations .... You can only delete it for philosophical reasons. in my opinion, there is nothing wrong with that. what I want to clarify is that we are using philosophical criteria in choosing our models. A lot of cosmology tries to hide it. 
<BR> In 2003, physicist Robert Gentry proposed an attractive alternative to the standard theory, an alternative that is also the evidence listed above. Dr. Gentry claims that the standard Big Bang model is based on a faulty paradigm (the Friedmann-Lemaître paradigm expansion of space-time), which, according to him, is inconsistent with the empirical data. Instead, he chooses to base their model on the paradigm of the static space-time of Einstein, which he claims to be the "true cosmic Rosetta." Gentry has published several papers outlining what he considers to be serious flaws in the standard model of the Big Bang. Other senior dissident include Dr. Hannes Alfvén, Nobel Laureate, Professor Geoffrey Burbidge, Dr. Halton Arp and Sir Fred Hoyle, famous British astronomer, which is believed to be responsible for the term "Big Bang" during a BBC radio broadcast in 1950.
<BR>
<HR> <H3> The Big Bang Theory - What about God </H3>?
Any discussion of the Big Bang theory would be incomplete without the question: what about God? This is because cosmology (the study of the origin of the universe) is an area where science and theology meet. Creation was a supernatural event, that is, occurred outside the natural realm. This fact raises the question: is there any thing else that exists outside the natural realm? Specifically, there is a master architect there? We know that this universe had a beginning. It was God the "First Cause"? We do not try to answer that question in this short article. Just ask the question.