twitter
gplus
facebook
Top Headlines:
Earth’s Magnetopause Vibrates Like Giant Drum When Hit by Strong Impulses Multicellular Life Began 1.5 Billion Years Earlier than Thought Cassowary’s Distinctive Helmet Acts as Thermal Radiator ALMA Detects Salts around Young Star New Titanosaurian Dinosaur Unearthed in Tanzania Chimpanzees’ Gestural Communication Follows Same Laws as Human Language: Study Underground Volcanism on Mars May Have Been Active Extremely Recently Earth’s Magnetopause Vibrates Like Giant Drum When Hit by Strong Impulses Multicellular Life Began 1.5 Billion Years Earlier than Thought
1234567
 
 


Astrophysicists May Have Found Universe’s ‘Missing Mass’
Feb 18, 2019 by News Staff / Source
About a third of the normal matter — meaning hydrogen, helium and other elements — created shortly after the Big Bang is not seen in the present-day Universe. One idea is that this missing mass resides in large-scale filaments in the form of warm-hot intergalactic medium (WHIM). Using a new technique, an international team of astrophysicists from the Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Konkoly Observatory and Eotvos University has found strong evidence for the hot component of the WHIM based on data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and other telescopes. The results will be published in the Astrophysical Journal.

The main part of this graphic is from the Millenium simulation, which uses supercomputers to formulate how the key components of the Universe, including the WHIM, would have evolved over cosmic time. If these filaments exist, they could absorb certain types of light such as X-rays that pass through them. The inset in this graphic represents some of the X-ray data collected by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory from a distant, rapidly-growing supermassive black hole known as a quasar. The plot is a spectrum -- the amount of X-rays over a range of wavelengths -- from a new study of the quasar H1821+643 that is located about 3.4 billion light years from Earth. Image credit: Springel et al / NASA / CXC / CfA / Kovacs et al.
The main part of this graphic is from the Millenium simulation, which uses supercomputers to formulate how the key components of the Universe, including the WHIM, would have evolved over cosmic time. If these filaments exist, they could absorb certain types of light such as X-rays that pass through them. The inset in this graphic represents some of the X-ray data collected by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory from a distant, rapidly-growing supermassive black hole known as a quasar. The plot is a spectrum — the amount of X-rays over a range of wavelengths — from a new study of the quasar H1821+643 that is located about 3.4 billion light years from Earth. Image credit: Springel et al / NASA / CXC / CfA / Kovacs et al.

“If we find this missing mass, we can solve one of the biggest conundrums in astrophysics,” said Dr. Orsolya Kovacs, lead author of the study.

“Where did the Universe stash so much of its matter that makes up stuff like stars and planets and us?”

Dr. Kovacs and colleagues used Chandra to look for and study filaments of warm gas lying along the path to a quasar, a bright source of X-rays powered by a rapidly growing supermassive black hole.

This quasar, called H1821+643, is located about 3.4 billion light-years from Earth.

If the WHIM’s hot gas component is associated with these filaments, some of the X-rays from H1821+643 would be absorbed by that hot gas.

Therefore, the astrophysicists looked for a signature of hot gas imprinted in the quasar’s X-ray light detected by Chandra.

One of the challenges of this method is that the signal of absorption by the WHIM is weak compared to the total amount of X-rays coming from the quasar. When searching the entire spectrum of X-rays at different wavelengths, it is difficult to distinguish such weak absorption features from random fluctuations.

Dr. Kovacs and co-authors overcame this problem by focusing their search only on certain parts of the X-ray light spectrum, reducing the likelihood of false positives.

They did this by first identifying galaxies near the line of sight to H1821+643 that are located at the same distance from Earth as regions of warm gas detected from ultraviolet data. With this technique they identified 17 possible filaments between the quasar and us, and obtained their distances.

Because of the expansion of the Universe, which stretches out light as it travels, any absorption of X-rays by matter in these filaments will be shifted to redder wavelengths. The amounts of the shifts depend on the known distances to the filament, so the team knew where to search in the spectrum for absorption from the WHIM.

While narrowing their search helped, the scientists also had to overcome the problem of the faintness of the X-ray absorption. So, they boosted the signal by adding spectra together from 17 filaments, turning a 5.5-day-long observation into the equivalent of almost 100 days’ worth of data.

With this technique they detected oxygen with characteristics suggesting it was in a gas with a temperature of about one million Kelvin.

“By extrapolating from these observations of oxygen to the full set of elements, and from the observed region to the local Universe, we can account for the complete amount of missing matter. At least in this particular case, the missing matter had been hiding in the WHIM after all,” the researchers said.

“We were thrilled that we were able to track down some of this missing matter,” said Dr. Randall Smith, also from the Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.

“In the future we can apply this same method to other quasar data to confirm that this long-standing mystery has at last been cracked.”

_____

Orsolya E. Kovacs et al. 2019. Detection of the Missing Baryons toward the Sightline of H1821+643. ApJ, in press; arXiv: 1812.04625

Share This Page

 


 
LATEST NEWS
Volume rendering showing continuity between sheet and string morphologies in a single specimen. Scale bars - 1 cm. Image credit: El Albani et al, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1815721116.
Multicellular Life Began 1.5 Billion Years Earlier than Thought
Feb 19, 2019 | Paleontology
Cassowaries use their casque much in the same way as some other birds use their beaks for heat exchange. Image credit: Lolame.
Cassowary’s Distinctive Helmet Acts as Thermal Radiator
Feb 19, 2019 | Biology
Excessive use of cigarettes, or chronic exposure to their compounds, affects visual discrimination, supporting the existence of overall deficits in visual processing in tobacco addiction. Image credit: Free-Photos.
Smoking More Than 20 Cigarettes a Day Can Damage Vision, Study Says
Feb 19, 2019 | Medicine
The main part of this graphic is from the Millenium simulation, which uses supercomputers to formulate how the key components of the Universe, including the WHIM, would have evolved over cosmic time. If these filaments exist, they could absorb certain types of light such as X-rays that pass through them. The inset in this graphic represents some of the X-ray data collected by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory from a distant, rapidly-growing supermassive black hole known as a quasar. The plot is a spectrum -- the amount of X-rays over a range of wavelengths -- from a new study of the quasar H1821+643 that is located about 3.4 billion light years from Earth. Image credit: Springel et al / NASA / CXC / CfA / Kovacs et al.
Astrophysicists May Have Found Universe’s ‘Missing Mass’
Feb 18, 2019 | Astronomy
The Somali red aloe (Aloe sanguinalis), with co-author Dr. Ahmed Ibrahim Awale, at Lafarug, Somaliland, in January 2018. Image credit: Barkworth et al, doi: 10.3897/phytokeys.117.28226.
New Species of Aloe Discovered in Somaliland
Feb 18, 2019 | Biology
An artist’s impression of Orion Source I, a young, massive star about 1,500 light-years away. The blue region -- about 1/3 the way out from the center of the disk -- represents the region where ALMA detected the millimeter-wavelength ‘glow’ from the salts. Image credit: NRAO / AUI / NSF / S. Dagnello.
ALMA Detects Salts around Young Star
Feb 18, 2019 | Astronomy
This diagram shows how the effects of Gαs-coupled agonists on T cells can be influenced by sleep or disease. Image credit: Dimitrov et al, doi: 10.1084/jem.20181169.
Study: Sleep Improves Ability of Human Immune Cells to Bind to Their Targets
Feb 18, 2019 | Medicine
Night sky centered on the south Galactic pole in a so-called stereographic projection. In this special projection, the Milky Way curves around the entire image in an arc. The stars in the stream are displayed in red and cover almost the entire southern Galactic hemisphere, thereby crossing many well-known constellations. Image credit: Meingast et al, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834950 / Gaia DR2 skymap.
Astronomers Discover Large Stream of Stars in Solar Neighborhood
Feb 15, 2019 | Astronomy
Pollen patterns: SEM images and simulations. Image credit: Asja Radja / Maxim Lavrentovich.
Nature Favors Production of Asymmetrical Pollen Grains
Feb 15, 2019 | Biology
Mnyamawamtuka moyowamkia in its environmental setting. Image credit: Mark Witton.
New Titanosaurian Dinosaur Unearthed in Tanzania
Feb 15, 2019 | Paleontology
Beta-carboline compounds offer great promise for the treatment of alcoholism. Image credit: Imagens Evangelicas / CC BY 2.0.
Researchers Identify Gene as Target for Alcoholism Prevention and Treatment
Feb 15, 2019 | Genetics
New images from NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft reveal an outline of the ‘hidden’ portion of the Ultima Thule that was not illuminated by the Sun as the spacecraft zipped by, but can be ‘traced out’ because it blocked the view to background stars also in the image. Image credit: NASA / Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory / Southwest Research Institute / National Optical Astronomy Observatory.
Ultima Thule’s ‘Lobes’ Are Not Spherical, New Horizons Images Show
Feb 14, 2019 | Space Exploration
Spotted softshell turtles (Pelodiscus variegatus) in life, females. Image credit: Thomas Ziegler.
Researchers Discover New Species of Softshell Turtle
Feb 14, 2019 | Biology
Gestures of our primate cousins may be more similar to our own language than previously thought. Image credit: Republica.
Chimpanzees’ Gestural Communication Follows Same Laws as Human Language: Study
Feb 14, 2019 | Biology
The south pole of Mars. Image credit: NASA.
Underground Volcanism on Mars May Have Been Active Extremely Recently
Feb 14, 2019 | Planetary Science

 

 
HOME ABOUT US NEWS ARCHIVE COPYRIGHT PRIVACY POLICY NEWSLETTER RSS CONTACT US
© 2011-2019. Sci-News.com. All Rights Reserved. | Back to top